Thank you. Welcome, friends. Welcome. Thanks for joining us. So we're here again. We made
it. That's always a great fortune. And we've gathered together to explore some of the teachings
of the Buddha in Gurumache, which is just such a tremendous extraordinary fortune. I'm so honored
to be able to be here, to be able to explore these teachings with you. And so first, as
we always do, we just try to really reconnect and activate our motivation to bring up that
joy and appreciation for this very special opportunity we all have together, to really
see that all beings want to be happy. No one wants to suffer. It is a universal truth.
And so why are we doing this? To really bring that to mind. We're doing this so all beings
can be free of suffering and achieve enlightenment, total freedom. And then thirdly, to give
ourselves a little window, give ourselves a little break and just let ourselves be good.
We can just be good. So connect to that sacredness of oneself, of one's experience, of what's
around us. So activate these three points in our minds as the lineage masters always
encourage us to do. We'll do that together here.
So here we are. We're about to explore and open a big, bold, beautiful question. Are
deities real? That's the topic today for this brief little talk. Are deities real? And so
at the beginning, it's always important to remember definitely for myself, this is an
immense question. And we're just peeking into it. We're giving a little room to, in our
minds, like a little window of opportunity to kind of play and engage and be curious
about this question. It's a very big question. Are deities real? So step one, to entertain
any question really truly, we actually have to entertain it, which means we have to be
open to what the answer might be, not the answer we want to be, not the answer that
has to be there for us, that we expect is going to be there, that all our friends think
should be there. We actually have to be open to the inquiry. That's what an inquiry is.
To analyze, to loosen, to open, to fixate less. So fundamentally the question, in a
lot of very simple ways, are deities real? It means am I in a type of awareness now that
allows for magic? That allows for creativity and flow and grace and connection. The sacredness
of experience. Does my awareness right now allow for that? That's going to be a big part
of any answer we discover when we look at such an important question. What's the type
of awareness? How am I engaging this inquiry? I think this is a vitally important inquiry
for everyone. We can look at it in terms of, for Tibetan Buddhists, definitely it's a big,
big question that really is vitally important to be with, to contemplate. For not Tibetan
Buddhists, for not Buddhists, for just people. It's also a really relevant, important question
to be open to. Are deities real? So, I was recently listening to an academic anthropologist,
cognitive psi person. Really amazing. Extraordinary. Going to give this big series of free open
lectures on the, I won't name names and say things, but a brilliant mind was going to
talk about topics like shamanism, altered states of mind, peak experience, flow states,
within five minutes of laying out this big, you know, 50 plus hours course, but then five
minutes at the beginning he said, of course I don't believe in the spirits, all this mystical
stuff. I'm a scientist. That's a red flag. Not open to that inquiry. There's a lot of
inquiries we can investigate. But if at the very beginning of answering a question like
are deities real, we laugh and we nudge each other and we say, ah, of course, you know,
we have science now. Of course, I'm, you know, an adult, you know, I don't believe in the
superheroes and the imaginal this and that and I like ritual, I like drugs, I like shamans
leading the way and flow states and stuff, but those deities, of course, that's obviously
not true. Interesting. Isn't this interesting? We've gotten so good at so many things, but
we're still very unwilling to investigate certain questions. Open mind, allow the magic
to maybe be there. This is deep magic, deep creativity. On the other side, Buddhists,
a good friend of mine, long time practitioner, he was once in close contact with Tinley Norborim
iche
and Tinley Norborimiche asked him to come. So he came to him and he looked at him and
Tinley Norborimiche said, why is it that so many long time Buddhists hate Buddhism? That's
really interesting. I think so. Are deities real? We could say it in a lot of ways. Are
the six realms real? Is Akanishda real? Is Amitabha real? Is Gurumiche a historical figure?
Was he born as an eight-year-old emanation on a lotus surrounded by daikinis with the
Vajra seven-line prayer magically resounding around him? Are mantras real? Is there something
after this life? Was there something before this life? Is pure relative truth real? Is
all this baby stuff? I should be careful about how we answer that. So then I'm going to play
mainly in the sandbox of Buddhists and specifically Tibetan Buddhists for just this really quick
window into such a big, profound topic. And I'm locating this in texts, liberating duality
with wisdom display by our venerable teachers, venerable Kemperimiches. According to the
regular conventional way of thinking, if something is black, it is not white. Usually only one
of these notions can be applied at any given time. When we try to make reality fit the
limitations of our preconceptions, we become very narrow. Working in this way will not
allow us to understand the mystical, profound aspects of the universe. Our tiny peephole
of knowledge reveals very little of the actual world. We see only what fits through our small
hole. Chronological and linear thinking is characteristic of dualistic conceptions. We
cannot apply it to the true nature or the state of great equanimity. Peering through
such a small crack will not allow us to see much. We have to open our minds if we're interested
in seeing more. Are deities real? So before we go into the question, there's some good
reasons why it's a relevant question. One, we just proved its relevance with the way
that we engage this opportunity. Renunciation, bodhicitta, pure perception. These are the
three pillars of Vajrayana Buddhism, the third being pure perception, pure body, pure speech,
pure mind. It's called deity, mantra, dharmakaya, pure form, pure sound, pure space. This is
a key, core, essential principle of Tibetan Buddhism. Part of the essence of the view
of all the views of Tibetan Buddhism, there's six yanas of these views. Following bodhisattva
yana, the third yana characterized by approaches like Zen, for example, or Rongtong like we
talked about earlier. Empty of self, empty of fixation, this is the middle way view. In
addition to that, there's six levels of tantric approach and they all believe in this pure
relative truth, pure perception, pure view. Not as an accessory or as an option, as a
fundamental principle that has to be included in order for Tibetan Buddhism to be Tibetan
Buddhism, in order for Vajrayana to be indestructible, in order for mantra, mind protection, in
order
for our mind, our wisdom awareness to be protected from duality. Pure perception is essential.
This is a key Vajrayana point. Whom said this point? We just prayed earlier to all these
lineage masters, the Buddha and Guru Rinpoche, Yeshe Sojal, Zor, Nu, Nyak, a hundred turtans
and others, King Trits and Detsen. All these kama and terminal lineage masters, up to our
very present own living, breathing teachers, they all claim that pure perception is actually
how reality is. All of them. This should really cause us to pause. This question cannot be
casually dismissed. Are deities real? Ha ha ha ha. Buddha said they're real. Guru Rinpoche
said they're real. Vimalamitra, Chantarakshita, Longchenpa, Rongzompa, Naropa, Nagarjuna, they're
all masters of sutra and tantra. You know how many of them became tantric masters? They
got to the pinnacle point of studying the sutras. Many of them were heads of the most
renowned institutes of Tibetan Buddhist learning, like Nalanda, Vikramalasila, or Sangpoon Naotong
in Tibet. They got to the pinnacle of logic, of epistemology, of philosophy, of epistemics,
of poetry, of the 10 major and minor sciences. They were the best. And they saw that that
approach only went so far. They had to go beyond the framework of logical thinking, of dualistic
framing. They had to. They saw there was more. So how did Saraha become Saraha? He left Nalanda
and sought a tantric teacher. How did Naropa become the great Naropa? He left Nalanda and
sought out his teacher, tantric teacher. He sought out a guru. He sought to receive fifth
instructions. He saw that logic only went so far. Shanta Akshita, female amitra, scholar
practitioners. These are not drop out hippy dippies. They're not like, oh, feel the body.
Feel the sensations. This is reality. Of course, it's reality if you hit your hand with a hammer.
It hurts. It's reality. You feel it. There's a lot of wisdom in the body, and there's a
lot of wisdom in the intellect, and there's a lot of wisdom in other ways of knowing that
aren't just logical, and they're not just body. The tantras really have this as a bedrock
of what tantric Buddhism is. Post-conceptual wisdom doesn't fit into duality mind, dualistic
boxes. The answer to our deity's real has to come from that post-conceptual place in
ourselves, that way of knowing that knows differently and it reveals new things and
it opens new magic, new understanding. We see things that we didn't see before. Isn't the
path like that a succession of moments where we reveal a little more? If it's not like
that, it's not a path. We're just confirming everything that we believe in. We're not opening,
we're not growing, we're not softening. We're just saying, I'm right, I'm right, I'm right,
I'm right, see, I'm right, I'm right, I'm right. That's why we get a guru who gives
us that mirror. How are we stuck? And what is it like to not be stuck? And then show
us both those inside ourselves, where we're stuck and what it's like when we don't fixate
in that way. I know this is a culture we really, we're so obsessed with ourselves. My wisdom,
my retreat, my practice, my accumulation. I'm my teacher. I want to be my teacher. Spiritual
but not religious, right? It's the biggest, fastest growing religious group in the world
right now. Spiritual but not religious. It means I don't want to be in your box. There's
a lot of legitimate reasons to not want to be squeezed in someone else's oppressive box.
But if we make our own box, it's day one of that lineage. Take a little from here, a little
from there. I'll take some Zogchen from here. I'm going to not deal with all that deity
mantra stuff. I like the Four Noble Truths. Buddha always taught the yanas as a complete
system. Every yana has a view, meditation, conduct, and result. They always stay together.
You can't take a view from Zogchen and match it with the conduct of the first yana and
insert some behavior from the third yana. You don't get Buddhism. We have to really be
aware of these things in our mind to have our practice really keep growing. Keep opening
and not expire and be stale. And if we're outside of a lineage context, that's fine.
And we have to know what comes with that. And if we're in a lineage context, like Tibetan
Buddhism is always in a lineage context when it's done properly. All the teachings go back
to the Buddha in Gurumice. And all this stainless succession of uninterrupted living wisdom
and lineage. It's still alive. The blessings are still alive. They're still current. We
can still connect to them. But if we just want to be our own teachers, that's fine.
But then we have to recognize, I thought this morning, it was so funny, in the seemingly
immortal words of Cher. Snap out of it. Are we going to keep doing that to ourselves?
I'm my own teacher. Am I going to keep waking myself up? Can I keep going past what I expect
and giving myself a fresh perspective? Can I do that in a way that actually is an organic
natural process that keeps opening? Isn't it so much easier to be around some experts
that help us learn more quickly, more thoroughly, more comprehensively? They've know this terrain.
They know this path. I'm not saying that's what everyone has to do. But amongst Tibetan
Buddhists, that's what we're doing. We're following in the footsteps of the Buddha,
Gurumice, pinnacles of scholarship, pinnacles of meditation. How fortunate we are. Another
book, The Guru Drinks Bourbon. Once you've started this journey of practicing
Vajrayana, many things can happen and you have to be prepared. It's important to have
faith, but it's also good to have doubt and use reason. Often, faith comes in the aftermath
of doubt and doubt comes in the aftermath of faith. And the one that comes second is often
much more powerful. In the end, we have to abandon both. The Vajrayana Path is the union
of wisdom and method, the union of science and faith, the union of myth and truth. But
many materialists, those whose sites are not set beyond this life, don't see the non-duality
of these dualities. They may be awed by the vastness and depth of the theory of non-duality,
but disregard faith and devotion, even though faith and devotion are the vehicles that effectively
deliver you to non-duality. They can accept the logic of truth, but then snobbishly dismiss
myth and ritual. They don't seem to understand that myth is the only means to understand
the truth, because everything we say is myth. Even Vajrayana practitioners find it difficult
or don't even think to try to marry these seemingly unmarable dualities. For example,
many apply the method, such as prostrating to the guru or offering a lotus flower, hands
beautifully folded in the Anjali mudra, but they do so as a ritual without applying wisdom.
Prostrating is surrender, but very few people prostrate with genuine confidence. They don't
think I'm prostrating to the deity who is none other than myself, and likewise the deity
is prostrating to me. Knowing that the deity and the prostrator are one and the same is
the ultimate prostration. Here in this book, I'll try to show you that the guru is actually
like the horizon. A horizon is apparent, a line where earth and sky appear to meet, but
in reality they never meet. There is only an illusion of an ending point, a point of
reference where we can stand and measure and assess. In this way, the guru is like a horizon
between wisdom and method, myth and truth, science and faith.
We just can't expect all of reality to fit into our working model, into my duality frame,
my preferences, my hopes, my fears, my expectations, my trauma, my wonder, my awe. Reality is very
big. If we ever try to just squeeze reality into my model, the juice stops, the aliveness
stops, the connection to reality stops. It's a desecration. We box ourselves in and then
complain that there's no juice left. Life is so empty, so meaningless, and we boxed ourselves
in. We made it without sacredness, desacred. We got out of a type of awareness that appreciates
magic. We lost the power of myth. We lost the connection that all relative truth is partial.
It's all a fiction. It's a dream, illusion, hallucination, fabricated, artificial. The
Buddha taught this so clearly. Absolute truth, absolute truth, definitive truth is beyond
this fixation. It can't be boxed in. We all come with reality for sentient beings, and
we have to know this is a working model. The best thing a working model can do is try to
replace itself with a better working model. And that's what the Nanyanas do. We
use duality to have better duality, to have better duality, to go beyond duality.
We use science to find magic. We use magic to find science. We use faith to
find reason. We use reason to find faith. We use practice to inform study. We use
study to inform practice. It doesn't all fit into what I want, my box, what I know
now. There's so much more than what I know now. We can't just cherry pick the
pieces we like, because all we're gonna do is reconfirm our own bias. And then
we'll get into echo chamber of groupthink, and then we'll wonder why is
everything so polarized? Why is this so black and white? Why is everyone against
me? Why are they all so dumb? We did it. We were participant in that tango. Weren't
we? Did we make friends with them? Or did we just demonize them? We othered them. In
the name of science, we other magic. Interesting. In the name of justice, we
other the sacred. We desecrate. In the name of trying to restore the beauty and
sacredness of life, we desecrate the sacred. I mean it's really weird. I'm not
just saying little word games here. I'm saying from the more Tibetan Buddhist
view, like we don't have to do this. There's another way we can like engage
with open mind. We can keep looking. Snap out of it. We can keep waking ourselves
up. We can keep using experience to help wake us up. What does that mean? Wake us
up. Refreshing. Fresh air. Fresh evidence. Our practice. Fresh, you know. If we always
do a practice one way, good. It's good to get constant and in a groove. But we got
to switch it up some too, you know. Otherwise, it just gets habitual. We
forget. The point is to be in a fresh, connected, really like in all type of
experience all the time. These great masters are in like childlike wonder
with reality all the time. And they can manage these giant monasteries and
nunneries and meet with world leaders and maintain a living lineage for
centuries without breaking it. That's an impressive feat. I haven't seen any
modern scientific materialists pull off an uninterrupted living lineage wisdom
for 2,500 years. They must be doing something right. It can't be casually
dismissed. Oh, that's pre-modern myth. Deities and all these things. There's
maybe something more going on here. If we don't let ourselves actually have a real
investigation of this question, it's not and it's not a real question. To quote
Derrida, the only real question is what you don't know the answer to. To quote a
postmodernist. To push postmodernism to go beyond itself. When we get too
self-assured. My practice. My way. This is how it is. This is what the Buddha taught.
Open this. I look I looked at this today. Rinpoche's great Gurya Garba. Splendid
presence of the king of all Tantras, right? This is filled with reasons about
why reality is pure. You can open a page. It's pouring out. The sacredness of
reality. The sacredness of all experience. We really think we're smarter than the
Buddha and we're gonna redesign Buddhism. We're gonna update it. 3.0, 4.0, 5.0,
whatever. We can't even keep a community together longer than five years or
something. Without the big, the seemingly indented, it's almost like a syndrome now.
I'm like saying some strong things but sometimes some strong things have to be
said. Is this a mental syndrome? White male investor syndrome. A lot of people
seem to be non-dual gurus nowadays. They don't like the word guru but they'll
sell you stuff and they figured it out and it's five points. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Somehow
they can't keep a community together longer than five years, something, ten
years, whatever. This is better than what the Buddha taught. Snap out of it. It's
called humility. It's the main quality when I see people who are really
investigating that question. Are deities real? They're so humble, so open, they're
so fresh, they're still looking. deity, mantra, dharmakaya, pure body, pure speech,
pure mind. These are the essential points we repeat again and again and again.
That's still amazing for them. Why? Because it's living. They're in it. It's
alive. It's living dharma and they prostrate to the deity and the deity
prostrates to them and everything is a deity. Outer deity of the guru, inner
deity of the subtle deities. Janasattvas, wisdom beings. The actual
wisdom beings in a sadhana practice when we visualize Tara, for example, that our
visualization is the samayasattva, visualized deity. It's pretend, it's
duality. But then we ask the living deity, the wisdom deity, the jhanasattva, actual
living Tara to come and bless that, to merge and mingle with our conceptualization
so that it becomes inseparable. Why? Because the nature of all of it is deity,
mantra, and dharmakaya. Pure body, pure speech, pure mind, pure form, pure sound,
pure space. It's already like that and we're just waking up to it. We're seeing
in a new way and we're open to the possibility. Maybe it can be like this.
Maybe the Buddha was right. At the very least, we're willing to do the experiment,
to put in some time, do some nundra practice, to study and look closer.
We're willing. We're not like, "Oh no, thanks Galileo. I'm not gonna look down
the telescope." Isn't that what a casual dismissal is like? "Oh deities, hahaha."
I haven't seen germs. I haven't seen atoms. I haven't seen quarks. I haven't seen
11 dimensions. I haven't seen other galaxies. I've seen pictures of them. I've
seen models of them, ideas of them. People talk about them like amazing things, you
know. It all requires faith. So much requires faith. If our standard for truth
is direct perception, that's it. What we do is we become a nihilist. Only what I
can see, hear, taste, only according to what I can think, feel, that's nihilism.
It's limited to my little very small corner of reality.
Kazakhstan, that must not exist. Never seen that. Center of the earth, never seen
that. This is how we get this post-truth madness. Oh my, my, my experience is the
kid, the pinnacle. That's what I'm gonna use to determine everything. I'm sorry.
That's how we get all this madness. Everyone's personal. Then the person with
the strongest conviction wins. Is that how like a healthy mature civilization
functions? The loudest person wins. The roughest person wins. The one with the
most conviction. Because the Buddha taught us to have certainty conviction
and that everything's pure. Didn't he? In our practice, that's the one of Vajrayana
practice. I'm trying to unpack this topic in different ways. In Vajrayana
practice, that's one of the three qualities. CPS, clarity, purity, stability.
Stability is Vajra pride. Unwavering conviction that I am the deity.
Everything I experience is the deity. Not just my meditation box, my room, what's
around me. Everything is pure. Everything. And it always has been. That's one of the
three pillars of Vajrayana practice, being Vajrayana practice. We have to have
that. Vajra pride. Unwavering. And that's where it's a really key point. During
study time and contemplation, we study and we contemplate. And during practice,
we practice and we don't mix them. During practice time, we let
ourselves be the deity. We try to see everything as deity. We allow for that
possibility. And even if not just allow for that, be in a magical state of
accepting the sacred. The mystery, the awe of what could happen, you know.
We can even just allow for it. And then we really have to just let ourselves
really have conviction and courage. And we grow this little by little over time.
That's why it's a practice. That's why it's a path. Little by little, by little,
by little, by little, by little. And then we'll have these threshold big break
pivot point moments. And wow, we'll kind of see things newly. And what is it like?
Love and compassion and devotion. So much devotion comes up. Oh, thank you for
showing me this. Thank you for the technique to reveal this. You show me the
path. You show me the experiment. And I put some time in and now I see it. And
like, what is that like? Then we check in. And they keep helping us. These people,
the elder wisdom. People way farther along than us, you know. They help us grow so
fast. The best teachers want all their students to surpass them. They're just
trying to hold enlightenment for themselves. They want everyone to wake
up. The more people who wake up now, the better. It's really like bodhisattva
question, no? What would I trade if in this room right now that I'm sitting in,
at home, looking at the screen, or in here, in this room? What would I trade? I could
wake up right now off the wheel of samsara, on the boomies, boom. Or everyone
else in the room can. And I'm stuck in samsara still. What are we going for? What
are we going to choose? My wife can wake up and I can say to stay closed. Or I can
wake up and she can stay closed. He can stay closed. They can stay closed. What
am I going to pick? These are real questions for practitioners. Because it's
just saying, what is my mind like now? That's the practitioner question. What is
my mind like now? Do I allow for the sacred? Or do I not? Do I allow for wonder
and magic and awe, merriment, cheer, rejoicing, exuberance, power, dang, salt,
ropa, all these things, you know? Because the Buddha taught all of these pure
relative truth. It was the union of rangtong and shantong, the second
and third turning. And then the tantras came based on that. Open mind, power of
the expressive qualities of bodhicitta. We take these skillful practices of
atriana and we just let all this karma self-liberate. We don't say it's bad and
now I gotta wash it away. We let it come and release. It releases itself on knots
itself. That's what atriana is doing. I'm not saying I can do it, but that's the
teaching, and it can be really simple. I know sometimes we want an answer. Is a
deity real or not? Like show me the money, you know? Where's the video? I'm quoting
Tom Cruise now. Share and Tom Cruise. Wow. It's all in me, this conditioning. I can't
avoid it, so I'm gonna use it. I'll use the duality to try to break out. I'm gonna
break out of that Tom Cruise prison. Snap out of it. We want to see the video
recording, you know? Maybe it requires a new way of seeing. Another way of seeing.
A deeper way of being. It might just be that it doesn't all fit into my model.
Doesn't all fit into my box. It might be bigger than that. It might be more
special than that. Are we ready to allow for that level of specialness that
everything is sacred? Tibetans have done that for as a culture, as a people.
They've done that and what's been the result? Just in general. They care for the
land. They didn't desecrate the land. Even like go to try to take opportunities to
not hunt any animals, even though the food was hard to get. They like, after
this big genocide, there's so many of them are so forgiving, you know? They're
even more compassionate for the people and the systems that really hurt them,
killed them. Killed all these people they know, you know? So I mean, it's like, how
much more proof in the pudding do we need, you know? To actually care for the
sacredness is an important feature. The disaster of modernity that
stripped everything to its bits and quarks and like ones and zeros and what
only what we can nihilistically see with our eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, mind.
That's great. We put someone on the moon and we can excavate all the living
systems of the planet. We're good at it, you know? We're very adaptive to totally
transform, terraform our environment and we're terraforming all the time with the
views we have, right? Our view completely terraforms our experience and the
Tibetan Buddhists are saying, have an open view and you will start to see the
sacredness, the pure body, pure speech, pure mind. That will terraform. It'll
start to change the way you engage with your own habits. You'll start to love
your emotions and not hate them. You'll start to love your friends, not love the
enemies, you know? This view is so key to actually enact any of this stuff because
if we really believe they're an enemy we can do all these five of this and seven
of that and all these like tools we can take all these little things and put them
in our tool bag. But if we don't activate that view as step one, allow the
possibility that sacredness happens. This is sacred. This is wholesome. This is
fundamentally good. That's why ethics is the foundation of all the other things,
samadhi and wisdom. We seem to have lost that in every other field of
expertise in the so-called advanced modern contemporary culture. Like all of
them are like completely devoid of ethics. Doesn't that seem to be true? Tibetan
Buddhism ethics is like always you can't if you don't have ethics there's not a
next step. That is what the Buddha taught for has so long thousands of years.
There's a lot of wisdom here that we've overlooked and as practitioners it's our
job to kind of keep activating it.
It's our job to let the possibility maybe this is all enlightened now. Maybe my
nature is fundamentally good and the really quick thing that we've all heard
but it's really comes down to the juicy points you know. Everything is mind. Mind
is empty. Empty mind always expresses itself as energy. This energy is
unceasing a rising display of the nature. Everything is this awakened empty nature.
This display of mind. We've all heard that. Those are like the Buddhists that's
called a pith instructions you know. I'm not saying I'm giving a pith instruction
but we've heard it. It's all mind. Mind is empty. Empty mind always arises as
energy, as knowing quality. That knowing quality displays itself as objects
experienced by awareness, a subject. This all happens purely and everything we
experience all the objects are pure. Pure relative truth experienced by what?
Pure wisdom. My Dharmakaya mind experiences the Dharma dot to object.
That's the playground of Adriana. Dharmakaya mind experiencing its
sambhoga kaya expression displaying as nirvana kaya. This is the playground we're
in. This is what our nundra assumes you know. This is what we're key. We use that
as a working model, a conceptual model, to let ourselves leap into it and allow
maybe I can maybe this is true and we do that again and again and again and we
get stuck in our practice and get in our habits we got to shift it up and ask for
help and we keep trying to have it be a living experience of the sacredness of
life of our own mind of our own heart of everyone we see then everything becomes
a deity everything becomes the teacher and in the meantime we use a teacher a
realized awakened being to see that it's all the teacher that wears good
Rinpoche course Guru Rinpoche is out there and he's the visualization Samaya
Sapa and he's the actual living Guru Rinpoche and he's also my mind that is
true absolute Guru Rinpoche my mind everything's Guru Rinpoche in this view
it's all deity we don't have to be so literal but we can be very literal
Amitabha and Guru Rinpoche is a certain form and all this is a full spectrum of
tangibility here really obvious to really really subtle but as are they're not
really kind of too finicky on these details they don't get obsessed Guru
Rinpoche has to only look one way you know or Chenrezig has to only look one
way they don't fixate like that that's not the teaching right may I be a boat a
breeze a bridge a memory anything that relieves suffering anything anything
Guru Rinpoche can be anything we have to let anything be Guru Rinpoche and in the
meat that's the view that's what we're getting to that's the fruition and on
the path we need to keep remembering that reactivating that this is my mind
it's open and empty of fixation all this bodhicitta comes up as it's a rising
display which becomes these beautiful ornaments of sight smell sound taste
touch thought feeling this is the mandala and it all circles back to the
wisdom nature of emptiness and it all read out circles and expresses as the
display this is like straight Vajrayana view so we can we have to do this we
have to enact this and we zoom in and we zoom out and that's what we're doing all
the time we zoom in on the Guru Rinpoche's nose and we look in at the
atoms of his nose and we see on the atom of this nose is a millions of mandalas
of deities and we zoom out out out out out out out out and everything we see in
all the Hubble telescope things we that have ever been seen by humans they're
like the pupil of Guru Rinpoche can we be that flexible that's what Vajrayana is
training us to do to disrupt our habitual patterns to disrupt our
convenient comfortable framing new fresh alive communicating happening it's
happening and we open and we relax we let us do a thing and then we close and
then we open and we relax that's the blessing of Guru Rinpoche then we
actually start to see according to all these Tibetan Buddhist teachings though
all these Bardo teachings after death there actually are these living deities
true new Bardo of the true nature right it expresses this light sound light
beams peaceful and wrathful deities they said those are actually there we just
don't see them now covered by duality fabrications I don't see them they're
actually there they're more real than art my limited karmic vision the Buddha
saw so much more than me I have to have that genuine humility that genuine
interest what more did he see how can I see like that too the how is really the
interesting part because it's not just holding a belief hard everything is
deity everything is deity everything is duty that's not what a mantra is mantra
is protecting the mind from obsessing with it duality model protecting the
mind from being all fixated that's what a mantra does open refresh new new new
new new new new because life is always that's reality it's always new ever
changing interdependence and ribcage book this great do you garba tantra these
four points they go into this there's hundreds of pages long the great do you
garba tantra was the root tantra of all the Maha Maha yoga tantras the beginning
of the inner tantras they said there's four points that establish the four
reasons in this book the four reasons that establish the inseparability of
great equality and natural purity they go through these four the four reasons
that everything is a deity one call it the reason of the cause of the one cause
the reason of the one cause and I'm going through this fast the single cause
of samsara and the single cause of nirvana the same single cause is one's
own mind and here we're talking about wisdom mind unborn awareness this is
what's pointed out in a middle way view why the sutras are essential middle way
view unborn what's the next unceasing by nature like the sky the second reason is
that this unborn mind ceaselessly displays as experience as energy
unceasing display the second reasoning of unceasing display all this is
unceasing display of mind unborn because if we try to really find mind we won't
find it in a fixed logical way that's middle way teaching there's a lot of
teachings to actually come to that resolution and a lot of the Zogchen
instructions ask us to do that inquiry look for your mind look for your mind
look for your mind and this way and this all that second point second reasoning
that open unborn nature unceasing display unborn unceasing unborn
awareness unceasing display isn't this similar to like emptiness is form form is
emptiness form is emptiness that's empty mind emptiness is formed unceasing
display this is heart sutras the prasad parmita
sutras went so deep they went right into the tantras it just has to be revealed
the third reasoning unborn wisdom awareness is always inseparable from
unceasing display they're always together this is very casually said in
Vajrayana emptiness awareness emptiness and clarity in union they say when it
when we see that as inseparable unborn awareness unceasing display it's called
the seven treasures of absolute truth the first is this the first is like the
I don't want to get that word wrong yeah the first is called sphere of absolute
truth container the second is called the wisdom of the absolute truth that's the
subjective awareness happening in the container object and subject right but
pure those are inseparable and the other two the five other treasures are pure
body pure speech pure mind pure activities pure qualities so in this
union of unborn nature and unceasing display we have the seven treasures of
absolute truth arise naturally that becomes a lived experience and that we
get so that's called a reason of blessings that's the third reason in the
giri garbatantra chapter 11 then the fourth reasoning is the reasoning of
direct perception we see for ourselves with no inference or deduction that
everything is always the union of emptiness and it's unceasing display not
filtered through any duality boxes that's the fourth reasoning these are
the four proofs that everything is the great purity in union with the great
equality of absolute truth unborn wisdom awareness arising is ceaseless display
always inseparable in union and we experience that directly for ourselves
not mediated through duality mind you can please look at this teaching of
venerable camperomaches splendid presence of the king of all tantras the
great giri garbat we're so fortunate to be a part of this the great jangam in
pomeranpoche he said the four things for the most thoroughly established truth it
fits with the words of the Buddha it follows the words of the lineage of
enlightened masters it follows the personal advice of our own teacher and
it conforms with our own direct experience this is the most rust robust
type of evidence in Tibetan Buddhism a simpler way to say that is it follows
all the scriptures it follows logic and it's confirmed by our own intelligence
that's called certainty wisdom it's not I hit my hand with a hammer and I am
certain of the truth of the pain but the Buddha taught that to truth suffering and
all that you can go through how all these things fit when we really have a
conviction that's unwavering and we should be confident in but regarding the
great union of great equality and the relative natural purity of all phenomena
otherwise known as a deity this is a core belief of Vajrayana Buddhism of
Tibetan Buddhism and this is assumed with every sadhana practice and as
practitioners following a lineage to humbly let ourselves like just bathe in
the nectar of these wisdom blessings of the sacredness of our opportunity of all
of our experience to let ourselves allow for the possibility that maybe this
really is all enlightened maybe my nature is enlightened in your nature is
enlightened and even if we do it just as if as if it's true as if I'm enlightened
and you're enlightened wouldn't that change so much bring back the sacred
wouldn't we love each other more fully wouldn't we have better ethics wouldn't
we care for our environment wouldn't we think of more long-term intergenerational
what's gonna happen way after me how am I preparing for what's coming next
wouldn't that all be just great even if we just say deities are real I'll just
act as if it's true in the meantime I'll test it in my experience in my practice
and I'll see for myself have a direct perception over time won't life be more
beautiful like that
I'm just like saying a little few words of like some teachings I've received in
these teachings vermiches they're all there for us to enjoy and to explore
ourselves and to open ourselves the beauties there the means are there the
practices are there the experiments are there the containers are there the
sanghas are there the living lineage is there all these endowments we have these
endowments we just have to stay a living part of this process in order for it to
keep happening I'm so glad to be a living part of that process I'm so amazed
and you know when the it arises as deity and the deity points out all the ways
I'm being stuck I pray that I will humbly surrender to that wisdom experience
and I'll let the crazy wisdom of having my own fixation be pointed out so
finally I can just let that go you know let some new air in the room open up
let this let it just be sacred thank you friends thank you
so the quick thing I forgot to mention about the the inquiry of our deity's
real the answer to this inquiry from the Tibetan Buddhist perspective really
highlights a significant distinction between Zen and Zogchen so Zogchen is
the great completion the great perfection it's the ninth and highest
final Yana taught by the Buddha and Guru Rinpoche and it includes all the sub
yanas including sutra Mahayana which is an example one example of that is Zen so
in general that approach of the bodhisattva Yana or Zen it really it's a
specialty is pure mind wisdom mind right called sometimes called beginners mind
and then the tantras add to that pure body and pure speech that's called deity
and mantra plus dharmakaya right which is pure mind so the tantras always have
pure body pure speech and pure mind and so we can see how Zogchen then would
include pure body and pure speech that's a deity and mantra in order to bait in
order to actually be Zogchen to be the great completion and include all the
approaches taught by the Buddha not saying it's it's not judging the the
approach the other approaches the more foundational ones it actively loves and
includes them so that's one distinction that highlights like the importance of
like how we answer for ourselves or make sense of our deities are real is it's
another way to say that is pure body and pure speech is that something I'm going
to actually let myself kind of mingle with deity and mantra and then just to
kind of put the context of kind of what I went over that was mainly from
meditation so there's meditation and post meditation and in meditation it's
very clear the Vajrayana view the succinct way to talk about the three
bhadras of pure body pure speech pure mind is everything is transcendental
wisdom rainbow body so that's the succinct way to just say that's the view
held in a Vajrayana Buddhist context in a practice session that's the view we're
trying to see the presence of enlightened body speech and mind both
outside and inside completely mingling as enlightened activities all happening
within open expansive infinite awakened awareness so that's pure body pure
speech and pure mind then in post meditation when we get up and engage the
world if we believe everything is deity so how do we deal with suffering in the
world how do we deal with people who are mean to us so that's when it's really
careful to distinguish between yanas and like his only in his due to Rinpoche said
like on outwardly we follow according to proctymosha conduct we follow cause and
effect its impeccably Rinpoche often says timidly very carefully we follow the
details of cause karmic cause and effect inwardly we follow the bodhisattva yana
the view of bodhicitta relative and absolute bodhicitta secretly we follow
the pure perception of pure body pure speech and pure mind and we're trying to
maintain that all the time and meditation and post meditation but
post meditation is more how we show up with what we say and what we do
communicating with others and that's proctymosha level the inward motivation
is bodhisattva yana the secret view is Vajrayana and we're trying to do all
those three in harmony with each other as a single complete sphere or system
this great perfection view that's what Zogchen really is talking about there
then and so we can very carefully distinguish that's the thing with a
wisdom awareness it has the five wisdoms it's not just open it has a mirror like
wisdom all accomplishing wisdom Darmadatta wisdom distinguishing wisdom
or discriminating awareness wisdom it can very carefully distinguish things
and that's where the answer to the question are deities real is very
interesting because in a certain context when we're engaging with others we can
say no they're not if that's the most helpful thing because the Buddha didn't
talk about deities and all the sutras right in I mean it's so it we really in
terms of our outreaching activities our view has to match up with what's
happening around us and then that view matches with that conduct and that
behavior and that meditation and we can do that as in our display or in our
outreaching activities and inwardly we're holding we're trying to hold this
vashri on a view with this motivation of bodhicitta so it doesn't mean just think
everything's a deity so always be worshiping every event even the horrible
things and the mean things like we have to actually use this discriminating
wisdom because that wisdom is fully happening when we're actually allowing
pure body and pure speech and pure mind to happen it's not just blank emptiness
awareness right we're actually engaging the relative phenomena according to the
relative frameworks that the phenomena are working on that's called skillful
means or skillful effective helpful communication so I wanted to highlight
that because that's a big important question so that answer to our deities
real it can be very different depending on how we're engaging and on our own
side you know the reality of deities goes beyond thinking about a deity or
not a deity or pure or not pure I mean it really goes beyond that kind of
questioning interrogation it's allowing things to spontaneously be there and
then we're opening ourselves on the path to seeing new emergent phenomena that we
missed before more subtle features of reality that we just weren't there were
over our heads we weren't available and open to notice yet and that's when they
say the pure expression pure relative truth expression of DD and mantra really
starts to become a direct living experience and so even if we have that
direct experience we still show up and communicate with others according to
what's helpful for them and that's always part of the Vajrayana view
because Vajrayana always includes Sutra Mahayana it always includes
foundational Buddhism that's how it maintains a healthy complete system so I
just didn't get to saying that I wanted to say it sorry to kind of like round
that out sorry thank you